the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu okay
so we are going to continue looking
at what happens when we have have
non-independent
variables so I have a
hereon I'm afraid we don't take
deliveries during class time
sorry okay please take a seat thanks
oh no
thanks
okay
[Applause]
okay so Jason you please claim your
package at the end of
lecture um okay so last time we saw how
to use lrange multipliers to find the
minimum or maximum of a function of
several variables when the variables are
not independent and today we are going
to try to figure out more about
relations between variables and how to
handle functions that depend on several
variables when they're related
so just to give you an example in
physics very of very often you have
functions that depend on pressure volume
and
temperature
where pressure volume and temperature
are actually not independent but they're
related Say by PV equals
nrt so of course then you can substitute
and express the function in terms of two
of them only but very often it's
convenient to keep all three but then we
have to figure out what are the rates of
change of p and v with respect to T with
respect to each other the rate of change
of f with respect to these variables and
so on so we have to figure out what we
mean by partial derivatives
again
so okay I mean
marginar let's say just for the sake of
notation I'm going to think of a
function of three variables
XYZ where the variables are related by
some equation that I will put of the
form in the form G of XYZ equals some
constant okay so that's the kind of same
kind of setup as we had last time um
except now we're not just looking for
Minima and Maxima we're trying to
understand partial
derivatives so the first observation is
that you know
if x y and z are related then that means
in principle we could solve for one of
them and express it as a function of the
two
others so in particular can we
understand even without solving maybe we
cannot solve can we understand how the
variables are related to each
other so if for example Z you can think
of Z as a function of X and Y so we can
ask
ourselves what are the rate of change of
Z with respect to X keeping y constant
or with respect to Y keeping x
constant and of course if we can solve
then we know a formula for this and then
we can compute these guys but what if we
can't
solve so how do we find
these things without
solving
well so let's do an
example let's say that my relation is
x^2 + YZ plus Z Cub =
8 and let's say that I'm looking near
the
point XYZ equals 2 3 1 so let me check
2^ 2 + 3 * 1 + 1 cubed is indeed 8 okay
but now if I change X and Y A little bit
how does Z
change well of course I could solve for
Z in here it's a cubic equation there is
actually a formula but that formula is
quite complicated we actually don't want
to do that that's an easier
way
so how can we do it well let's let's
look at the
differential of this constraint quantity
okay so if we call this G let's look at
DG
so well what's the differential of this
so differential of x s is 2x
DX
plus I think that 's a
zdy there's a ydz and there's also a 3z
s DZ okay you can get this either by
implicit differentiation and the product
rule or you can get this just by putting
here here and here the partial
derivatives of this with respect to X Y
and
Z
okay any questions about how I got
this no Okay so
so now what do I do with this well this
represents somehow variations of
G but well I've set this thing equal to
eight and eight is a constant so it
doesn't
change so in
fact well we can set this to
zero okay
because
uh well if they call this
G then gal 8 is constant that means we
set DG equal to
zero
okay so now let's just plug in some
values at this
point that tells us well so if xals 2
that's 4
DX Plus Z is 1 so
Dy plus y + 3 z s should be 6 DZ equal
Z and now this equation here tells us
about a relation between the changes in
X Y and Z near that point it tells us
how if you change X and Y well how Z
will change or it tells you actually
anything you might want to know about
the relations between these variables so
for example you can you know move DZ to
that side and then Express DZ in terms
of DX and Dy or you can move Dy to that
side and express Dy in terms of DX and
DZ and so on it tells you at the level
of the derivatives how each of the
variables depends on the two
ofs okay so just to clarify
this
if we want to view Z as a function of X
and Y
then what we will do is we'll just move
the DZ to the other side and it will
tell us DZ equal - 1 / 6 * 4 DX +
Dy and so that should tell you that
partial Z of partial X is - 4/ 6 well
that's Min -
2/3 and partial Z over partial
Y is going to be minus
6 okay another way to think about this
when we compute partial Z over partial X
that means that actually we keep y
constant okay let me actually add some
subtitles here so here that means we
keep y
constant
and so if we keep y constant another way
to think about it is we set
Dy to zero we set Dy equals z so if we
do that we get DX equal -46 DX and that
tells us the rate of change of Z with
respect to
X here we set x
constant so that means we set DX equal
to zero and if we set DX equal to Z then
we have DZ equals -6 of Dy that tells us
the rate of change of Z with respect to
Y okay any questions about
that
no what
yes can you
explain yes okay let me explain that
again so we found an expression for DZ
in terms of DX and Dy that means that
this thing is the differential is the
total differential of Z viewed as a
function of X and
Y okay and so the coefficients of DX and
Dy are the
partials or another way to think about
it if you want to know partial Z partial
X it means you set y to be constant
setting y to be constant means that you
will put zero in the place of Dy so
you'll be left with DZ equal - 46 DX and
that will give you the rate of change of
Z with respect to X when you keep y
constant
okay so various ways to think about this
but hopefully it makes
sense
okay so how do we think about this in
general
well if we know that g of
XYZ equals constant
then DG which is G subx
DX plus G suby
Dy plus G subz
DZ should be set equal to
zero
okay and now we can solve for whichever
variable we want to express in terms of
vs so for example if we care about Z as
a function of X and
Y we'll get that DZ is netive G subx of
G subz
DX sorry
minus G sub y g subz d
y and so if we want partial
Z of a partial
X well so one way is just to say that's
going to be the coefficient of DX in
here or just to write down the other way
we setting y equals
constant so that means we set Dy equal
to
Z okay and then we get DZ
equals g subx over G subz DX so that
means partial Z over partial X is minus
GX over
gz and see that's a very
counterintuitive formula because because
you have this minus sign that you
somehow probably couldn't have seen come
you know if you hadn't actually derived
things this way I mean
it's it's pretty surprising to see that
minus sign come come out of nowhere the
first time you see it but
um
okay so now we know how to find the
rates of change of constrainted
variables with respect to each
other you can apply the same to find you
know if you want partial X partial y or
any of them you can do
it any questions so
far
no
okay so before we proceed further I
should
probably expose some problem with the
notations that we have so far so so let
me try to get you a bit
confused
okay so let's take a very simple example
let's say I have a function f of x y
equals x + y okay so far doesn't sound
very
confusing
and then I can write partial F of a
partial X and I think you all know how
to compute it it's going to be just one
okay so far we
pretty
happy
now let's do a change of variables let's
set X = U and Y = U + V okay it's not a
very complicated change of variables but
let's do
it
then F in terms of u and
v well so F remember was x + y
becomes U + U + V that's twice U +
V what's partial F over partial
U it's two so X and U are the same
thing partial F of partial X and partial
F of partial U well unless you believe
that 1 equals two they're really not the
same thing okay
so that's an interesting slightly
strange
phenomenon xals U but partial F partial
X is not the same as partial F partial
U so how do we get rid of this
contradiction
well we have to think a bit more about
what these notations mean okay so when
we write partial F of a partial X it
means that we are varying X keeping y
constant when we write partial F of
partial U it means we're varying U
keeping V constant so varying U or
varying X is the same thing but keeping
V constant or keeping y constant are not
the same thing if I keep y constant then
when I change
X so when I change U then V will also
have to change so that their sum stays
the same
or if you prefer the other way around
when I do this one I keep V constant if
I keep V constant and I change U then y
will change it won't be
constant so that means well life looked
quite nice and easy with his notations
but what's dangerous about them is
they're not making explicit what it is
exactly that we're keeping
constant Okay so
so just to write
things so here we change U and x to the
same thing but we keep y
constant while here we change U which is
still the same thing as
X but what we keep
constant is V or in terms of X and Y
that's y - x constant
and that's why they're not the
same so whenever there's any risk of
confusion okay so not in the cases that
we had before because you know in what
we've done until now we didn't really
have any problem but in the situation
like this to clarify things will
actually say
explicitly what it is that we want to
keep
constant
okay so what's going to be our new
notation well
so it's not
particularly Pleasant because it uses
now a subscript not to indicate what
you're differentiating but rather what
you're holding constant so that's quite
a conflict of notation with what we had
before um I think I can safely blame it
on physicists or chemists so
okay so this one means we keep y
constant
and partial F of a partial U with veld
similarly okay so now what happens is we
no longer have any contradiction we have
partial F over partial x with
y constant is different from partial F
over partial x with v constant which is
the same as partial F over partial U
with v
constant okay so this guy is one and
this guys are
two so now we can safely use the fact
that xals U if we are keeping track of
what is actually held
constant okay so now that's going to be
particularly important when we have
variables that are related because let's
say now that I have a function that
depends on X Y and Z but x y and z are
related then it means that you know if I
look at say X and Y as my independent
variables and Z as a function of X and Y
then it means that when I do partial say
with respect to X I will hold y constant
but I will let Z vary as a function of X
and
Y or I could do it the other way around
I could vary X keep Z constant and let y
be a function of x and z and so I will
need to use this kind of notation to
indicate which one I
mean okay
any
questions
no all right so let's try to do an
example where we have a function that
depends on variables that are
related okay
so I don't want to do one with PV equals
nrt because probably I mean if you've
seen it then you've seen too much of it
and if you haven't seen it then maybe
it's not the best example so let's do a
geometric
example okay so let's look at the area
of a
triangle
so let's say I have a triangle and my
variables will be the sides A and B and
the angle here
Theta okay so what's the area of this
Triangle Well it's base time height over
two so it's 12 of the base is a and the
height is B sin
Theta okay so that's a function of a b
and
Theta now let's say actually there's a
relation between ab and Theta that I
didn't tell you about namely actually I
want to assume that it's a right
triangle okay
so let's now assume it's a right
triangle with let's say the hypotenuse
is B
so we have a right angle here
actually so a is here B is herea is here
so saying that it's a right triangle is
the same thing as saying that a equals B
cos
Theta okay so that's our
constraint that's the relation between a
and
thet and this is a
function of a b and
Theta and let's say that we want to
understand how the area depends on
Theta okay what's the rate of change of
the area of this triangle with respect
to Theta so I claim there's various
answers I can think of at least three
possible
answers
so what can we possibly mean by the rate
of
change of a with respect to
Theta so these are all things that we
might want to call partial a partial
Theta
but of course we'll have to actually use
different notations to you know
distinguish
them
so the first way that we actually
already know about is if we just forget
about the fact that the variables are
related okay so if we just think of
little a b and Theta as independent
variables and we just change feta
keeping A and B
constant
so that's exactly what we meant by
partial a partial Theta right we are not
putting any
constraint so just to
use some new notation that would be the
rate of change of a with respect to
Theta keeping A and B fixed at the same
time of course if we are keeping A and B
fixed and we're changing Theta it means
we completely ignore this property of
being a right triangle so in fact it
corresponds to changing the area by
changing the angle keeping these lengths
fixed and of course we lose the right
angle when we
rotate this side here here then the
angle doesn't stay right angle and
that's when we know how to
compute right because it's the one we've
been Computing all
along so that means we keep A and B
fixed and
then so let's see what's the derivative
of a with respect to Theta I guess
it's 12 AB cosine
okay that when we
know any
questions no okay the two other guys
will be more interesting um so far I'm
not
really doing anything with my constraint
let's say that actually I do want to
keep a right
angle then when I change Theta there's
two options one is I keep a constant and
then of course B will have to change
because if this width stays the same but
when I change Theta the height increase
and then this side length
increases the other option is I change
the angle keeping B constant so actually
this side stays the same length but then
a has to become a bit
shorter and of course the area will
change in different ways depending on
what I do
so that's why I said we have three
different answers so the next one
is
keep I forgot which one I say first
let's say keep a
constant
and that means that b will
change B is going to be some function of
a and Theta well in fact here we know
what the function is uh because we can
solve the constraint namely B is a over
coine
Theta but we don't actually need to know
that so
that the
triangle so that the right
angle
whatever so that we keep a right
and so the name we will have for this is
partial a over partial Theta with a held
constant okay and the fact that I'm not
putting B in my subscript there means
that actually B will be a dependent
variable it changes in whatever way it
has to change so that when Theta
changes a stays the same well B changes
so that we keep a right
triangle and the third
guy is the one where we actually keep B
constant and now
a we think of a as a function of B and
Theta and it changes so that we keep a
right
angle Okay so actually as a function of
B and Theta it's given over it's given
over there a equals B cosine
Theta and so this guy is called partial
a over partial
Theta with B held
constant Okay so we've just defined them
we don't know yet how to compute these
things that's what we're going to do now
but is the definition and what these
things mean is that clear to
everyone
yes yes
okay uh
yes okay so the second answer again so
one way to ask ourselves how does the
area depend on Theta is to say well
we'll
actually look at the area of a right
triangle as a function of a and Theta
only by solving for B and then we'll
change Theta keep a constant and ask how
does the area
change so when we do that when we change
Theta and keep a the same then B has to
change so that it stays a right triangle
right so that this relation still holds
that requires us to change
B so when we write partial a over
partial Theta with a constant it means
that actually B will be the dependent
variable it depends on a and Theta and
so the area depends on Theta not only
because Theta is in the formula but also
because B changes and B is in the
formula uh
yes uh no no we don't keep Theta
constant we vary Theta right the goal is
to see how things change when I change
Theta by a little bit
okay so if I change feta a little bit in
this one if I change feta a little bit
and I keep a the same then B has to
change also in some way so that it stays
a right triangle and then
because Theta and B change that causes
the area to
change okay so maybe I should explain
that again so Theta
changes a is
constant but we we have the constraint
AAL B cosine Theta that means that b
changes and then the question is how
does a
change well it will change in part
because Theta changes and in part
because B changes but we want to know
how it depends on Theta in this
situation yes why isn't there a
situation
b and a are not Conant but triang still
Ah that's a very good question so what
about I don't keep A and B constant well
then there's too many choices so I have
to decide actually how how I'm going to
change things see if I just say I have
this relation that means I have two
independent variables left whichever two
of the three I want but I still have to
specify two of them to say exactly which
triangle I
mean so
I cannot ask myself just how will it
change if I change Theta and do random
things with A and B it depends what I do
with a and b of course I could choose to
change them simultaneously but then I
have to specify how exactly I'm going to
do
that side ah yes if you wanted to indeed
we could also change things in such a
way that the third side remains
constant and that would be yet a
different way to attack the problem I
mean we don't have a good notation for
this here because we didn't give it a
name but yeah I mean we could you know
we could call this guy C and then we'd
have a different formula and so
on so I mean I'm not looking at it for
Simplicity but you could have many
more I mean in general you will want you
know once you have a set of nice natural
variables for you will want to look
mostly at situations where one of the
variable changes some of them are held
fixed and and then some dependent
variable does whatever it must so that
the constraint keeps keeps
holding okay so let's try to compute one
of them let's say uh I decide that we'll
compute this one okay let's see how we
can compute partial a partial Theta with
a held
fixed
[Applause]
okay
so let's try to
compute
partial a partial Theta with a held
constant so let's see three different
ways of doing
that so let me start
with method
zero okay uh it's not a real method
that's why I'm not giving it a positive
number
so that one is just we solve for b and
we plug we remove B from the
formulas okay so here it works well
because we know how to solve for b um
but I'm not considering this to be a
real method because in general we don't
know how to do that I mean if we use you
know at the beginning I had this
relation that was an equation of degree
three you don't really want to solve
your equation for the dependent variable
usually here we can
so solve for b and substitute
so how do we do that well the constraint
is AAL B cosine
Theta that means B is a over cosine
Theta some of you know that as a sec
Theta that's the
same
um and now if we express the area in
terms of a and Theta
only a is 12 of ab cosine sorry AB sin
Theta is now 12 of a^ 2 sin
Theta over cosine Theta or if you
prefer 12 of a s tangent
Theta
well now that it's only a function of a
and Theta I know what it means to take
the partial derivative with respect to
Theta keeping a constant I know how to
do
it so partial a over partial Theta with
a held
constant well if a is a constant then I
get this 12 a s coming
out what's the derivative of
tangent
squ very
good if you're European and you've never
heard of secant that's one of cosine and
uh if you know the derivative as 1 plus
tangent squar that's the same thing and
it's also
correct okay so that's one way of doing
it but as I've already said it doesn't
get us veryify are if we don't know how
to solve for b i mean we really use the
fact that we can solve for b and get rid
of
it
so there's two systematic
methods
and let's say the basic rule is that you
should give both of them a chance you
should see which one you prefer and you
should be able to use one of one of the
other on the exam okay most likely you
will actually have a choice between one
or the other um it will be up to you to
decide which one you want to use but you
cannot use solving and substitution
that's not
fair okay so the first
one is to use
differentials by the way um in the notes
they're called also method one and
Method two I'm not promising that I have
the same one I I might have you know one
and two switched it doesn't really
matter so how do we do things using
differentials well first we know that we
want to keep a
fixed and that
means that we'll set da equal to
zero okay the second thing that we want
to to do is we we want to look at the
constraint the constraint is
AAL B cosine Theta and we want to
differentiate
that well differentiate the left hand
side you get
da and differentiate the right hand side
as a function of B and Theta you should
get well how many DBS well that's rate
of change with respect to B that's
cosine Theta
DB minus B sin Theta D
Theta that's the product rule applied to
B * cosine
Theta
so well now if we have a constraint
that's relating da DB and D Theta okay
so that's actually what we did right
that's the same same sort of thing as
what we did at the beginning when we
related DX Dy and DZ that's really the
same thing except now our variables are
a b and Theta now we know that also
we're keeping a fixed so actually we set
this equal to
zero so we have 0 equals D equals cosine
Theta DB minus B sin Theta D
Theta that means that actually we know
how to solve for
DB Okay so
cosine Theta
DB equals B sin Theta D Theta
or DB is B tangent Theta D
Theta okay so in fact what we found if
you want is the rate of change of B with
respect to
Theta why do we care well we care
because let's look now at
da the function that we want to look at
okay so the
function is a = 12 AB sin
Theta well then
da so we have to use the product rule
carefully or we use the partials so the
coefficient of D little a will be parti
respect to little a that's 12 B sin
Theta d a
plus coefficient of DB will be 12 a sin
Theta
DB plus coefficient of D Theta will be
12 AB cosine Theta D
Theta
okay but now what do I do with that well
first I said a is constant so da is
zero second well we actually we don't
like B at all right we want to view a as
a function of theta
so well maybe we actually want to use
this formula for DB that we found in
here okay and then we'll be left only
with d thetas which is what we
want
so if we plug this one into that one we
get da
equal 12 a sin Theta
times B tangent
Theta D
theta plus 12 AB cosine
Theta and if we collect these things
together we get 12 of ab
times sin Theta time tangent
theta plus cosine
Theta D Theta and if you know your trig
then you will see that this is sin
Square cosine plus cosine Square cosine
that's the same as
Theta so now you have expressed da as
something time D
Theta well that coefficient is the rate
of
change of a with respect to
Theta with the understanding that we are
keeping a fixed and letting B vary as a
dependent
variable not enough space
sorry okay in case it's clear for you
let's think about it backwards so we
wanted to find how a
changes to find how a changes we write
da but now this tells us how a depends
on little a little B and
Theta well we know actually we want to
keep little a constant so we set this to
be
zero Theta well we're very happy because
we want to express things in terms of
theta DB we want to get rid of how do we
get rid of DB
well we do that by figuring out how B
depends on Theta when a is fixed and we
do that by differentiating the
constraint equation and setting da equal
to
zero okay
so we I guess to summarize the
method
we wrote da in
terms of Da DB D
Theta then we say that a is constant
means we set da equals z and the third
thing is
that because well we
differentiate the constraint
and we can solve for
DB in
terms of D
Theta and then we
plug into
da and we get the
answer okay
oops so here's another
method to do the same
thing differently it's to use the chain
rule so we can use the chain rule with
dependent
variables okay so what does the chain
rule tell us the chain rule tells us so
we will want to
differentiate
the formula for a with respect to Theta
holding a
constant so I
claim well what does the chain rule tell
us it tells us that well when we change
things a changes because of the changes
in the
variables
so part of it is that a depends on Theta
and Theta changes how how fast does
Theta change
well you could call that the rate of
change of theta with TOA with a constant
but of course how fast do theta depend
on itself the answer is
one so that's pretty
easy plus then we have this the partial
derivative the formal partial derivative
of a with respect to little a times the
rate of change of a in our
situation well how does little a change
if a is constant well it doesn't
change and then there's a sub little
B the formal partial
derivative times sorry the rate of
change of
B okay and how do we find this one well
here we have to use the
constraint okay and we can find this one
from the constraint as we've seen at the
beginning either by differentiating the
constraint or by using the chain rule on
the
constraint so of course the calculations
are exactly the same see this is the
same formula as the one over there just
dividing everything by partial Theta and
with subscript little
a but if you you know if it's easier for
you to think about it this way
then that's also valid
okay
so tomorrow we're going to review for
the test so I'm going to tell you a bit
more about this also as we go over one
practice problem on
that